[Music]
hello everybody my name is James the
reason for today's project is that I'm
actually working on something else and I
found out I need some deep reach clamps
I went out and priced them and there are
over 100 bucks for a good clamp that can
reach about 12 inches so I decided I
would make my own I've started here by
kind of sketching out what I want on my
assembly table this kind of gives me an
idea of the scale and perspective and
what I built ended up being just about
that except I had a 12 inch reach now
this is the perfect project for some
offcuts because the widest board you
need is really only about two and a half
inches and I've got lots of walnut' off
cuts but nothing in oak so I did go out
and buy this one board
the reason I chose red oak for this
project is because red oak has an
extremely high modulus of elasticity
this measures the stiffness and
resistance to bending
which is exactly what you want in the
clam there are two other unique factors
that make oak perfect for this project
the first is that it's cheap you don't
have to have FAS oak you can actually
get number two common and you can end up
picking that up sometimes for about $2 a
board foot this whole project only takes
about three board feet
the second reason and this is pretty
important is that that was a study done
in 2007 between fine woodworking and
Case Western Reserve University they
tested different types of wood and six
different types of glue to see what
formed the strongest bond and by far the
strongest bond created with the domestic
wood was red oak with a type one PVA
which is what tight bond three is it had
more than double the breaking strength
of many other combinations so needless
to say I was going to be expecting a lot
from these clamps and if you wait to the
end you might be surprised I test them
with a scale on video and the results
are pretty neat okay back to what I'm
doing so far I have ripped all the wood
in description routed together in
sections of three and here I'm about to
try to plane and joint everything square
you can start with four quarter stocks
which is about three quarters of an inch
thick then rip it down to width with the
equivalent of about three times the
thickness and just square it up after
that I'm just going to cut everything
something
this is kind of a behind-the-scenes look
at a new crosscut sled that I am making
it will have features that no other
crosscut sled does and you want to pay
close attention to this
no hands death zone you want to stay
away from that I'm using finger joints
here to hold the clamps together and
I've got a little stock that's mounted
to my outfeed table since that saw
blades so high I want to make sure I'm
not going to cut through the back
obviously with such a tall pedes you're
going to want to square it each time
before you clamp it up you want those
cuts to be nice and perpendicular
[Music]
and there's a preview of the two backs
cut I am making two clamps so that is
one for each clamp
since I want these to fit very precisely
I'm going to go ahead and do a sample on
a piece of 2x4 and kind of test fit
those together to make sure everything's
perfect
[Music]
okay this actually looks perfect and I'm
satisfied with that so I'm going to go
ahead and cut the oak now to match it
marking the hole locations that I can
tap the threads for the wooden screw
just make sure you clamp this down tight
before you try cutting those threads and
it really helps if you put some
lubrication in there basically the best
thing that I found to use is tung oil
it's very viscous so it doesn't tend to
run and drip very much and it really
makes the threads cut very nicely using
a really big dowel for the wooden
threads I'm actually going to cut the
threads on that too you could turn the
dowel on a lathe I got lazy and I went
ahead and spent ten bucks and bought a
three-foot long dowel at the store when
I was editing this video I could have
swore it looked like that thing was
going in crooked but it really is going
in straight if you haven't tapped
threads before but you have worked with
oak you might think Oh Giz a bad wood
for this but oak actually cuts really
really well for threads
you can look in here and you can see
that there's not a single tear out it's
a perfectly clean cut thread for the
dowel however you're really kind of to
soak it overnight with oil seems I
always try without it and I always get
some tear out when I soak it overnight
and oil it works great and that first
two inches there is Ted out because
yesterday I was too lazy to soak in oil
and I thought I'd go ahead and try it
and sure enough it chunked out you can
see the rest of it is cutting cleanly
though this is sped up at three speed by
the way and here is regular speed so you
can expect to invest a little bit of
time to cut this I think it probably
took me 15 minutes maybe 20 minutes to
cut through the whole three feet of
dowel once I got to a certain point I
flipped the dowel around I wrapped a
towel around it so that I could clamp it
down put about three or four clamps on
it and I'm just finishing up tapping
that side
quick test to make sure that it works
out since I don't want a glue failure I
am going to feed copious amounts of glue
into this joint
there I think that is just about the
right amount of glue yep
I put this squeeze clamp on reverse so
that that doesn't close in while I'm
putting pressure on the main one
okay we have to pack these wounds with
massive amounts of sawdust to prevent
hemorrhaging okay maybe I was kidding
there but this actually has a really
good function every so often you have
these joints that don't quite fit
together perfectly or at least you see
little hairline gaps in them if you do
this now before you clamp it down any
little gap that you might have had will
be 100% invisible when your joint is
complete
try it and you'll see
dang it more glue is getting out
I had no idea it takes so many clamps
just to build a clamp kind of makes you
wonder how the first clamp was made
okay it's all dry and that looks like a
nightmare to stand it is a lock hard but
I'm going to tell you a secret so many
people are afraid to go aggressive on
their sand people when they start don't
be just keep a light touch let's start
with a very aggressive paper this will
take off a massive amount of material in
a short period of time I am using 36
grit paper on my belt sander in a minute
I'm going to switch to my disc sander
and I'm going to start with 60 grit on
that it's going to clean up all the
marks in just a couple of minutes from
the belt sander and then I'll switch to
100 then 150 then 220 this entire clamp
can literally be standing in about five
or six minutes if you go this route by
starting very aggressive
[Music]
try to keep an eye on some of those
finger joints as we go you'll notice
that there are no gaps in them not even
a hairline gap using that sawdust really
makes a difference
[Music]
so I had a 36-inch Dell luckily these
clamps needed an 18 inch dowel and it
worked out perfectly
I get two of the members just putting a
little bevel and right at the edge of
the dowel where it's going to enter the
wood I could use the disk sander but I
was too lazy to pull the sander out this
is that scrap long that I was talking
about I'm going to use this to make the
turning handle in order to tighten my
clamp down mostly I just like drawing
shapes on wood
I'm going to put a hole in each handle
so that I can thread them down on to the
top of the screw walnut threads nicely -
and this is a one and a half inch tap by
the way I used one and a half inch
dowels
see more drawing
you can use the bandsaw to cut out the
handles or a coping saw works nice to
even a jigsaw anything will work for
that
[Music]
for the first five years I did
woodworking I couldn't afford a bandsaw
then for the next ideas woodworking
ideas ah so I got really really good
with my jigsaw
you
hopefully you can kind of see the shape
of what that handle is coming to be now
and that's why I had to do all that
drawing of course
[Applause]
here's a 3/8 inch radius round over here
it did the handle a really nice rounded
feel and makes it easier to grip
and you certainly don't need a router
table this is a perfect job for a palm
router I have one that I bought from
Home Depot it's a rigid palm routers its
quarter inch shank and it works great I
think I paid about ninety bucks for it
okay so I'm going to attach the handle
to the end of the screw with glue it
fits fairly snug anyway but I'm going to
put glue on both the handle and the and
the screw thread itself I didn't do it
here but it would have been a good idea
to a participant a little bit of sawdust
in with that glue that way when you
thread this handle on it fits just a
little bit tighter it's not really super
critical I'm actually going to drill all
the way through here with a 5/16 inch
hole and I'm going to put a double pin
all the way through
I didn't let the glue dry before I
drilled it and so the glue has been
burnt on the end of my drill bit there
but it did clean off nicely and remember
the best course of action is when you're
done putting glue just put a little bit
more glue and then beat that dowel in
with your giant lignum vitae Thor's
hammer I thought I'd go ahead and round
the edges here a little bit which I was
going around the back so they decided
not to set it want to compromise any
strength there but rounding at the very
front here isn't going to take away from
the strength and it makes it look a
little bit nicer okay this is the last
time I'm going to draw on the wood I
think three dowel pins going all the way
through these finger joints will really
stiffen it up quite a bit and we're not
going to rely a hundred percent on glue
even though I think it is sufficient
this is going to give us a little bit of
mechanical holding ability as well and
it allows me to give a nice design
feature I can use a walnut dowel for
some contrasting color
and I decided recently this round over
to the whole piece
[Music]
here's that little palm router that I
was talking about I had to use that in
order to get this part of the clamp
routed so I'm going to cut out some
walnut discs for the clamping pads
walnut is a good wood for this because
it's not too hard it's not nearly as
hard as red oak or maple and you don't
want anything that's too hard to be a
clamping surface it's going to go
against your wood and potentially dent
it with these hole saws I like to drill
a little bit over halfway turn it over
just relocate my hole and drill the
other half then pull it out it's always
a lot easier to get the discs out that
way and for a couple of these I have to
put some holes all the way through them
they're going to fit over the end of the
wooden screw as you'll see here in just
a minute
so I've gotta put a slot in the end of
the wooden screw it's going to be a
point where the the clamping pad can
kind of hang on to and spin freely
when the screw gets screwed down into
the object that you're clamping you
can't have the screw shaft turning
against it's going to Mar the wood so it
has to be sort of independent with the
clamping pad and you'll see how I put
that together
so it's pretty easy to make this cut on
the table saw we just set up the
distance that we want I've set my kerf
here I do one cut move the fence over
about an eighth of an inch to do the
second cut and then I get a quarter inch
wide total width and it's easy to do
that as long as the handle is not
attached to this screw unfortunately I
was at dummy and I went ahead and put
the handle on the other screw already so
I have to come up with a different
method to cut the slot on my other screw
so I had to move over to my really old
router table because that's the only
table that I had in it that would have
carry a quarter inch shank bit for some
reason my my newer router table so I
can't put a quarter inch shank bit
anyway quarter inch shank for a quarter
inch putter raised up to the right depth
and it's basically hovered over the
position and rotated the screw sir and
that did a good job as well
I imagine there's some other ways this
could be pet if you're a crafty
woodworker and you can probably come up
with a number
[Music]
[Applause]
so I've got to glue these disks together
and they little bit rough on some of the
surfaces since it was scrap wood so I
just wanted to touch them up on my disc
sander to make sure they're all
perfectly flat
so they'll glue together nicely if you
do this be really careful hold it hold
it tightly or maybe just play it safe
and stand them in the sanding block and
[Applause]
here I just need to glue the flat disc
to the ring
weights make fantastic clamps for things
like this I've got this solid block of
steel here it probably weighs ten pounds
it's going to work for one of them well
for the other one all I have is a block
of aluminum a tiny little block of steel
and a little piece of copper so
hopefully that will do so I need to sand
down the end of the screw here so it
will fit inside of the clamping pad but
we don't want to stand too much we want
to leave the shoulder there so when the
clamping pads all built around it it has
something to hang on to so the clamping
pad doesn't fall off I'm going to use a
very thin slice of oak in order to make
a little disc to hold the clamping pad
onto that shoulder
dang it more drawing on wood sorry got
to make the whole size here so that fits
down nicely into that groove that we fed
them to the wooden screw but not so big
that will fall over that shoulder I'm
making three because I'm sure I'm going
to screw one up so if you don't have a
bandsaw I would not use the jig saw here
coping sighs much better jigsaw is
really too violent for this little 1/8
of an inch thick piece of wood
okay time to put it all together this is
the secret assembly method don't tell
anybody how this works while I actually
do is just snap that little piece of oak
in half right along the grain because it
will glue back together perfectly and
you'll never notice the break we're
going to glue it back together and go to
the walnut at the same time all in place
this is basically going to hold the
clamping pad permanently on to the screw
so I'm going to kind of hold it in place
and put some pressure on it for a good
half minute to a minute and that will
allow the glue to bond enough where it
can just sit and hang on its own and
then I can use some tape as a clamp to
kind of tape it together I did cut that
oak disc just a little bit bigger than
the walnut itself that way I can sand it
down to be flush with the walnut when
it's all said and done and this actually
has a considerable amount of strength it
takes quite a bit of force or will take
quite a bit of force even to pry this
off if it ever gets damaged because
there's a lot of glue surface area that
oak is glued to the walnut all the way
around and are under normal use it will
never incur loading in that direction
all the loading will basically be the
screw pushing straight down onto the
flat 3/4 inch thick part of the walnut
against our clamping surface and we can
see how it's going to spin freely in
place I'll allow the screw to turn and
it will stay put
I thought I would make this up with a
another clamping pad at the bottom also
with walnut just for looks really and
here you get to see me using this clamp
for the very first time it's going to
actually clamp that pad down in place
for me
[Applause]
so we're standing this up and if you
made it this far you got to stay tuned
I'm going to test this clamp on a scale
here in just about three more minutes
[Music]
[Applause]
so my favorite finished is lacquer it's
very easy if you have a small project
like this you can buy lacquer in a spray
can the nozzles for this are great one
thing never to forget you must wear a
respirator if you're using lacquer it's
very dangerous to not use a respirator
okay it's time so I have a scale the
biggest scale that I could find is this
one it's a five hundred and fifty pound
scale we'll see how it goes
I know Matthias Wandel I don't know if
you follow him on YouTube
he built a sort of a c-clamp a deep
reach C clamp and I think he tested his
up to about 200 pounds so we'll see what
we can get out of this so I'm going to
use one of these clamps to hold the
other one firmly in place I think I'll
put down a piece of plywood first that
way all four legs from the scale can
touch it and then I'm going to put a
piece of plywood on top of that to
distribute the load so that clamp
doesn't punch a hole through the scale
not that it could but just in case and
here we go I'm going to have two cameras
running one is going to be focusing on
the readout and the other one we're just
going to hold by hand
okay yeah
so we're very excited the scale went to
564 pounds and then went to error and
you can see I've got a square on the
clamp there on the backside there was no
deflection on the inside I've got a
little bit less than 1/8 and that's
about 2/3 of the distance to the screw
so that's pretty good after releasing
the pressure I'm just going to check and
make sure and it does look like the
clamp has returned to perfectly square
so that's fantastic
so we're very excited the results are
great because sort of what I expected in
reality you know a little bit of science
and research went into this giving the
wood with the highest strength and the
best glue bond that we could in fact I
have a feeling this clamp could probably
clamp a thousand pounds of pressure so
if you're out there ever watching my
video Matthias I'm ready for a clamp
challenge thank you very much for
watching and please subscribe
[Music]
you